---
layout: post
title: Emacs Check-in (December 2019)
date: 2020-01-03 13:30
author: Joseph Diodato 
comments: true
categories: [emacs, computing, productivity]
---

*In November 2019 I took the plunge and committed to using [Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/){:target="_blank"} as the main driver for the bulk of my computing needs. The purpose of these monthly emacs updates is to highlight the ways in which my `.emacs` file has grown from the initial installation along with my own usage of the editor.* 

My full `.emacs` file can be found [here](https://github.com/jdiodato/misc/blob/master/.emacs){:target="_blank"} on my GitHub page. This post will go line-by-line through the modifications that I've made and my thoughts on the process so far. I haven't had the chance to properly explore elisp and to begin writing out my own functions yet but it's certainly something I hope to loop back around to in the near future. Unless noted otherwise, most code snippets are random bits I found on StackOverflow or other sources. 

## Setting Up MELPA 

[Milkypostman’s Emacs Lisp Package Archive (MELPA)](https://melpa.org/#/){:target="_blank"} is a package repository home to a number of packages that are available in emacs. The following chunk is pretty standard boilerplate. 

```elisp
;; Added by Package.el.  This must come before configurations of
;; installed packages.  Don't delete this line.  If you don't want it,
;; just comment it out by adding a semicolon to the start of the line.
;; You may delete these explanatory comments.
(package-initialize)

;--------------------setting up MELPA---------------------------------
(require 'package)
(let* ((no-ssl (and (memq system-type '(windows-nt ms-dos))
                    (not (gnutls-available-p))))
       (proto (if no-ssl "http" "https")))
  (when no-ssl
    (warn "\
Your version of Emacs does not support SSL connections,
which is unsafe because it allows man-in-the-middle attacks.
There are two things you can do about this warning:
1. Install an Emacs version that does support SSL and be safe.
2. Remove this warning from your init file so you won't see it again."))
 ; Comment/uncomment these two lines to enable/disable MELPA and MELPA Stable as desired
  (add-to-list 'package-archives (cons "melpa" (concat proto "://melpa.org/packages/")) t)
  (add-to-list 'package-archives (cons "melpa-stable" (concat proto "://stable.melpa.org/packages/")) t)
  (when (< emacs-major-version 24)
    ;; For important compatibility libraries like cl-lib
    (add-to-list 'package-archives (cons "gnu" (concat proto "://elpa.gnu.org/packages/")))))
(package-initialize)

(require 'package)
(add-to-list 'package-archives
             '("melpa-stable" . "https://stable.melpa.org/packages/"))
(package-initialize)
;-----------------------------------------------------------------------
```
## Choosing an Editor Theme

I think editor themes are one of those things that most folks don't pay too much mind to, but it's easy to become obsessed with finding the perfect theme! Whether you use a text editor or WYSIWYG program like Microsoft Word/LibreOffice Writer, I think there's great value in working in a theme that one finds visually appealing. I'm currently using the [cyberpunk theme](https://github.com/n3mo/cyberpunk-theme.el){:target="_blank"}. I previously flirted with the [dracula theme](https://draculatheme.com/emacs/){:target="_blank"}, and I hope to try out the [monokai-dark theme](https://github.com/oneKelvinSmith/monokai-emacs){:target="_blank"} in the near future! 

## Selected Packages

I'm not terribly sure what this short snippet does, but I'm fairly certain that it just tells Emacs which packages I want to load globally. Makes sense, since this is where the cyberpunk theme loads.

```elisp
  '(package-selected-packages
   (quote
    (cyberpunk-2019-theme  markdown-mode))))
(custom-set-faces
```
A few lines later, my config file loads the theme:

```elisp
(load-theme 'cyberpunk t)
```

## Exporting PDF's

For some reason, exporting PDF's from org mode especially gave me a fair bit of trouble. So I was playing around with different settings to see what tweaks might work. Naturally I had no idea what I was doing, although I do believe that `pdflatex` is taking care of my PDF documents. (I don't think I even need `auctex` for what I was trying to do). 

```elisp
(load "auctex.el" nil t t)
     (load "preview-latex.el" nil t t)

(setq TeX-PDF-mode t)

(setq latex-run-command "pdflatex")
```
## Python

I decided to thrust myself into the fire and use emacs as my Python integrated development environment (or IDE). IDE's come with loads of tools that aren't necessary for a novice programmer, and I'm happy to just have the ability to write code (with line numbers), and run the Python console in one window. In the future I will incorporate any additional pieces that I may need, such as advanced debugging functionalities. 

Emacs seems to think that I want to work in Python 2.X (which is so 2019). After all, [support for Python 2.X ended two days](https://www.python.org/doc/sunset-python-2/){:target="_blank"} ago as of the time that this post was written. This snippet explicitly tells Emacs that I want to run Python 3 as my default Python interpreter. 

```elisp
(setq python-shell-interpreter "python3")
(put 'erase-buffer 'disabled nil)
```

## A few more things...

Setting line numbers as a global setting -- pretty self-explanatory! 

```elisp
(when (version<= "26.0.50" emacs-version )
  (global-display-line-numbers-mode))

(global-linum-mode t) ;; Enables line numbers globally
```

I also used this last snippet to suppress the usual Emacs startup screen. And now I save one set of keystrokes everytime I fire up the editor! I haven't done the math yet, but I'm fairly certain that will add up over time. 

```elisp
(setq inhibit-startup-message t) ;; Hides the startup message
```

## Wrapping Up

And there you have it folks! A look at my first month in emacs. Nothing I've done has been terribly ground-breaking, but I'm really starting to get an appreciation for the ability to make Emacs an extension of myself (from a computational perspective at least). I totally may have butchered some of my Emacs terminology, but that's totally alright! I've learned a lot about Emacs during this first month of really using the editor, and I look forward to returning to this page as a baseline of how I've grown over time.

Thanks for reading,

Joe 

